7.15 (#537)
enonic/doc-xp: docs/iam.adoc

ID providers offer pluggable abstraction layer for user authentication.
As such, in order to authenticate or even create users in XP, you will need to define an ID provider.

ID providers are linked to your webapp or site through <<./deployment/vhosts#,virtual hosts>>.

=== Creating an ID provider
ID providers can be created and managed through the API,
or through the Users app in the XP admin console.

An ID provider essentially consist of the following:

* A unique name (cannot be changed later)
* ID provider application, with optional configuration settings.
* Permissions - specifies who can manage and access the ID provider

NOTE: ID provider applications must be installed before you can select them.

image::iam/system-idprovider-admin.png[Setting up an ID provider from the Users admin tool, 819]

[#system-id-provider]
=== System ID provider

XP ships with a special ID provider that cannot be removed or renamed. It is called the System ID provider.

When accessing the XP admin console for the first time in a fresh installation, you will see the login screen of System ID provider.

image::iam/system-idprovider.png[System ID provider login screen, 828]

> The purpose of the System ID provider is to hold system users such as `su` - the Super User, and `anonymous` - the user that is _de facto_ if no other user is specified.
> 
> image:xp-7150.svg[XP 7.15.0,opts=inline]
> System ID provider users - other than system users - are called <<#service-accounts>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of the System ID provider is to store system users, for example `su`(the Super User) and `anonymous` (the default user when no other user is specified).

image:xp-7150.svg[XP 7.15.0,opts=inline]
Users in the System ID provider that are not system users are called <<#service-accounts>>.
```

> NOTE: Prior to XP image:xp-7150.svg[XP 7.15.0,opts=inline], manually added users to the System ID provider were treated as regular users with username-password credentials. System ID provider username-password credentials are still supported, but strongly discouraged. Instead, use service accounts with JWT tokens. See <<#service-accounts>> for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Prior to XP image:xp-7150.svg[XP 7.15.0,opts=inline], users added to the System ID provider were treated as regular users with username-password credentials. Users with username-password credentials in the System ID provider are still supported, but strongly discouraged. Instead, use service accounts with JWT tokens. See <<#service-accounts>> for more details.
```

> NOTE: Avoid placing your regular users in the System ID provider, rather create a new ID provider instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Avoid adding real users to the System ID provider, rather create a new ID provider instead.
```

[#service-accounts]
==== Service Accounts

A service account is a special kind of user used by remote applications and services to authenticate with XP.
Service accounts are not meant to be used by humans. Service accounts are managed by XP Users app.

> Each Service Account may (but not required to) have a Service Account Key. Or multiple service account keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Service Account may (but not required to) have one or several Service Account keys.
```

Using Service Account Key is beneficial for security reasons:

* It allows to authenticate without transferring the password over the network.
* Multiple Shared Account Keys allow rotation of Public-Private key-pairs without service interruption.
* Stored Public key is not a hash of a password, so it is not possible to reverse-engineer the password from the public key.

> Service accounts keys are used to make authorized call to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service accounts keys are used to make an authorized call to:
```

* <<management_endpoint, Management Endpoint>>

> * any other XP service port endpoint that supports authentication and configured to use the System ID provider. See <<deployment/vhosts#virtual-hosts, Virtual Hosts>> for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* any other XP service port endpoint that supports authentication and is configured to use the System ID provider. See <<deployment/vhosts#virtual-hosts, Virtual Hosts>> for more details.
```

Requests are authenticated by JWT token in the `Authorization` header.

> The content of the header should look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Content of the header should look like the following:
```

[source,options="nowrap"]
Authorization: Bearer <token>

> JWT token must follow the following rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A JWT token must follow the following rules:
```

> * it must be valid RFC-7519 JWT token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* it must be a valid RFC-7519 JWT token.
```

* `alg` header parameter must be set to `RS256`.

> * `kid` header parameter must be set to the ID of the public key that corresponds to the private key used to sign the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `kid` header parameter must be set to ID of the public key that corresponds to the private key used to sign the token.
```

> * `sub` claim must be set to the ID of the service account, for instance, `user:system:user_id`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `sub` claim must be set to ID of the service account, for instance, `user:system:user_id`.
```

> * `exp` claim must be set to the expiration time of the token. The token will be rejected if it is expired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `exp` claim must be set to expiration time of the token. The token will be rejected if it is expired.
```

> * `iat` claim must be set to the time when the token was issued. The token will be rejected if it was issued in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `iat` claim must be set to issue time of the token. The token will be rejected if it was issued in the future.
```

> Private key from Public-Private key-pair is stored only on the client side and must not be shared with the XP server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Private key from Public-Private key pair is stored only on the client side and must not be shared with the XP server.
```

> Public key from Public-Private key-pair is stored in the XP server and is used to verify the signature of the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Public key from Public-Private key pair is stored in the XP server and is used to verify signature of the token.
```

NOTE: Service account keys are a security risk if not managed correctly. Make sure to rotate keys regularly and keep them safe. If you suspect that your keys have been compromised, you can revoke them in the Users app. Whenever possible use other ID providers instead, such as OIDC ID provider.

.JWT header example
[source,JSON]
----
{
  "kid": "51a29c2ab5ebf945f6a5ddac8935bf8b",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "alg": "RS256"
}
----

.JWT payload example
[source,JSON]
----
{
  "sub": "user:system:user_id",
  "exp": 1692787396,
  "iat": 1692787366
}
----

=== ID provider apps

In order for an ID provider to work, it must be associated with an ID provider application that handles the authentication process.

You may install ID providers from Enonic Market,
or <<./framework/idprovider#, build your own>> for a fully customized experience.

=== Standard ID provider app

> By default, XP ships with an app called the "Standard ID provider".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enonic XP is shipped with an app called the "Standard ID provider".
```
